Add troubleshooting docs (#488)
signalfx/splunk-otel-go: docs/troubleshooting.md

# Troubleshooting

## Enable debug logging

When things are not working, a good first step is to restart the program with
debug logging enabled. Do this by setting the `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL` environment
variable to `debug`.

```sh
export OTEL_LOG_LEVEL="debug"
```

Make sure to unset the environment variable after the issue is resolved, as its output
might overload systems if left on indefinitely.

## Missing spans

Spans might be dropped, or lost, due to several reasons. Follow these steps to ensure
spans are not being dropped by the `SDK`.

### Missing all spans from a service

> If you see no spans in the Splunk Observability Platform for your service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see no spans in the Splunk Observability Cloud for your service
```

> # Troubleshooting

Reviewer: can you please reference this doc in the main `README.md`?

Reviewer 2: +1

> ## Enable Debug Logging

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Enable debug logging
```

When things are not working, a good first step is to restart the program with
debug logging enabled. Do this by setting the `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL` environment
variable to `debug`.

```sh
export OTEL_LOG_LEVEL="debug"
```

> Make sure to unset this logging level after the issue is resolved, it is quite
> verbose and likely will overload systems if left on indefinitely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to unset the environment variable after the issue is resolved, as its output
might overload systems if left on indefinitely.
```

> ## Missing Spans

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Missing spans
```

> There are many points were spans may be dropped. Follow these steps to ensure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Spans might be dropped, or lost, due to several reasons. Follow these steps to ensure
```

> they are not being dropped by the `SDK`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
spans are not being dropped by the `SDK`.
```

> 1. [Enable debug logging](#enable-debug-logging). This should log the `SDK`
>    configuration and all spans sent to registered `SpanProcessor`s. Verify the
>    correct number of span are reported as exported in the log messages.
>    Additionally, pay attention to any `total_dropped` count.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [Enable debug logging](#enable-debug-logging). This logs the `SDK`
   configuration and all spans sent to registered `SpanProcessor`s. Verify the
   that spans are exported in the log messages. Check also the`total_dropped` count.
```

> 2. If an incorrect number of spans are being reported as exported, verify you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If an incorrect number of spans are being reported as exported, verify you
```

What determines a "correct" number of spans? Is that figure available somewhere as a grand total? Trying to understand how the user can easily carry out that mental math.

Author: It will entirely depend on the users application. I expect that if they are looking at the section for missing spans they will have some idea of what number they expect.

Reviewer 2: Could you add a suggestion here as to how could user check on this?

   are ending the spans you expect to see.

> 3. If spans are reported as dropped, the `BatchSpanProcessor` is dropping

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If spans are reported as dropped, the `BatchSpanProcessor` is dropping
```
This seems to be the key step. Is counting exported spans necessary (steps 1 and 2) or just checking whether they are being exported in general or not?

I guess that from this procedure one might get two outcomes:

- If all spans are dropped, it might be due to a configuration issue.
- If only some spans are being dropped, you might need to increase the span processor capacity. For this, it'd help to get concrete instructions with examples (what env vars would you modify and how?)

Author: There is another situation this is trying to address: no spans are exported or dropped. This can be the case when users are not correctly ending a span (or the SDK sampling is misconfigured which shouldn't happen given we do not expose this).

I can take another pass at this to give more context.

Reviewer 2: That'd be great if you'd do it, @MrAlias ! I think it'd be helpful to split it into three subheadings, one per situation.

   spans. Increase the capacity of the `BatchSpanProcessor`'s queue or the
   frequency it exports via [environment variables].

> Following these steps should help understand if spans are being dropped in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the previous steps might help understand if spans are being dropped in the
```

`SDK` or downstream.

## `transport: Error while dialing dial tcp: missing address`

> Logged error message:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you get the following logged error message:
```

```log
2022/03/02 20:29:29 context deadline exceeded
2022/03/02 20:29:29 max retry time elapsed: rpc error: code = Unavailable desc = connection error: desc = "transport: Error while dialing dial tcp: missing address"
...
```

> This error is cause by the OTLP gRPC exporter not being able to connect with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This error is caused by the OTLP gRPC exporter not being able to connect with
```

the target endpoint.

1. Make sure the target endpoint is up and receiving connections.
2. Make sure the target endpoint is reachable from the connecting service.

> 3. Make sure target endpoint is correct if providing an override.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Make sure target endpoint is correct if providing an alternative value.
```

>   For example, setting the `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` environment variable
>   to a URL without a prefix (i.e.
>   `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=otel-collector:4317`) needs to be updated to
>   include a prefix (`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://otel-collector:4317`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example, to set the endpoint URL to `otel-collector:4317` you must include
  a prefix: `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://otel-collector:4317`.
```

> If these steps do not resolve the problem please [open an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the previous steps don't resolve the problem, [open an
```

issue](#open-an-issue).

> ## Open An Issue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Open an issue
```

> If you have not found a solution after going through this document, please
> [open an Issue]. Be sure to include all the information included in the
> template to help address your issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have not found a solution after going through this document,
[open an Issue]. Be sure to include all the required information.
```

Spans might be dropped, or lost, due to several reasons. Follow these steps to ensure
spans are not being dropped by the `SDK`.

> ### Missing all span from a service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Missing all spans from a service
```

If you see no spans in the Splunk Observability Platform for your service

> ensure the following first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ensure the following first:
```

> 1. Make sure to wait a few minutes. There may be delays in the telemetry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make sure to wait a few minutes. There might be delays in the telemetry
```

>    pipeline. Wait a few minutes and double check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   pipeline. Wait a few minutes and check again.
```

2. Ensure your service is named properly. Check that your service names are not
   showing up in the Splunk Observability Cloud interface with a prefix of

>    `unknown_service:` (i.e. `unknown_service:go` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   `unknown_service:` (for example, `unknown_service:go` or
```

   `unknown_service:<your-programs-binary-name>`). If so, set the
   `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME` environment variable to your service's name and restart
   your application.

If you have taken these steps and still are not able to see spans, [enable

> debug logging](#enable-debug-logging). This should produce a log message like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
debug logging](#enable-debug-logging). This might produce a log message like
```

the following:

```text
debug	global/internal_logging.go:62	exporting spans	{"count": 154, "total_dropped": 0}
```

The `count` in the log message is the number of spans that were exported for a
batch by the `SDK`.

If `count` is non-zero that means the `SDK` is exporting span. If this is the
case, spans are being dropped downstream. Refer to [the collector
troubleshooting documentation].

If `count` is zero, that means the `SDK` is not exporting any spans. If this is

> the case, ensure that all spans your application is creating are ended (i.e.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the case, ensure that all spans your application is creating are ended (for example,
```

> `span.End()`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by using `span.End()`).
```

The `total_dropped` value of the log message is the cumulative number of spans
the `SDK` has dropped. If this value is non-zero see the [missing some spans
from a service](#missing-some-spans-from-a-service) section for more
information on how to resolve this.

### Missing some spans from a service

> If you see traces from your service in the Splunk Observability Platform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you see traces from your service in Splunk Observability Cloud that
```

> missing spans you likely need to configure the `BatchSpanProcessor` batching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
miss spans, you might need to configure the `BatchSpanProcessor`
```

configuration. First verify spans are being dropped by [enabling debug
logging](#enable-debug-logging). This should produce a log message like the

> following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration. Verify whether spans are being dropped by [enabling debug
logging](#enable-debug-logging). This might produce a log message like the
following:
```

```text
debug	global/internal_logging.go:62	exporting spans	{"count": 364, "total_dropped": 1320}
```

> The `total_dropped` value is the cumulative number of span dropped by the
> `SDK`. If this is non-zero that means the `BatchSpanProcessor` needs to be
> reconfigured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `total_dropped` value is the cumulative number of spans dropped by the
`SDK`. If the value is higher than zero, that means that you must reconfigure 
the `BatchSpanProcessor`.
```

> The `BatchSpanProcessor` has the following configuration parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `BatchSpanProcessor` has the following configuration parameters:
```

When we talk of the `BatchSpanProcessor`, what is that in Go parlance? An object?

Author: `BatchSpanProcessor` or BSP is a term used directly in the Go SIG. It can also be referred to as a span processor or a `BatchSpanProcessor` value.

| Configuration Parameter                        | Default | Environment Variable             |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------- |
| Delay interval between two consecutive exports | 5000    | `OTEL_BSP_SCHEDULE_DELAY`        |
| Maximum allowed time to export data            | 30000   | `OTEL_BSP_EXPORT_TIMEOUT`        |
| Maximum queue size                             | 2048    | `OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE`        |
| Maximum batch size                             | 512     | `OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE` |

The `BatchSpanProcessor` attempts and export when the queue contains the batch
size or more number of spans. It will drop spans when new spans are added but
the queue is full. Therefore there are two reasons spans are dropped: spans are
being added faster than they can be exported, or exporting is taking so long

> the queue fills during the export.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `BatchSpanProcessor` attempts an export when the queue contains the batch
size or a higher number of spans. It drops spans when new spans are added but
the queue is full. Spans might be dropped for the following reasons: 

- Spans are being added faster than they can be exported.
- Exporting is taking so long that the queue fills during the export.
```

If the `count` in the log message continually equal to the maximum batch size,

> it is likely spans are being added faster than they can be exported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the value of `count` in the log message is consistently equal to the maximum batch size,
the instrumentation might be adding spans faster than they can be exported.
```

One way to resolve this is throw more computational and network resources at
it. If you system has resources to spare try increasing the batch size to use
more network bandwidth per export and increase the queue size to hold a bigger

> buffer. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way to resolve this is provide additional computational and network resources. 
If your system has enough resources, increase the batch size to use more 
network bandwidth per export and increase the queue size to hold a bigger
buffer. For example:
```

```sh
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE=1024
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE=20480
```

If the system has limited memory to spare to not increase the maximum queue
size. If the network has not bandwidth to spare it might be better to reduce

> your export batch size. For example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the system has limited memory to spare, do not increase the maximum queue
size. If the network has not enough bandwidth to spare, reduce your export batch size. 
For example:
```

```sh
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE=128
```

This should increase the export frequency and hopefully drain the queue faster.

Otherwise, if the `count` value is not continually equal to the maximum batch
size, the bottleneck is likely the export itself. The `SDK` is taking so long
to export a batch that more spans than the queue can hold are added during this
time. Most likely this is caused by an underlying network issue. Make sure you
have a stable network to the target and that you have adequate bandwidth. In

> the meantime you can reduce export timeouts and increase the queue size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This might increase the export frequency and drain the queue faster.

If the value of `count` is not consistently equal to the maximum batch
size, the bottleneck might be found in the export process. The `SDK` might be 
taking so long to export a batch that more spans than the queue can hold are 
added. This might be caused by an underlying network issue. Make sure you
have a stable network to the target and that you have adequate bandwidth. You 
can also reduce export timeouts and increase the queue size. For example:
```

```sh
# 5ms export timeout.
export OTEL_BSP_EXPORT_TIMEOUT=5000
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE=5120
```

Be sure to there are enough memory resources on your system to accommodate the
increase in queue size.

These changes will drop whole export batches that take too long. This means
there will still be dropped data, but hopefully, if the network issues resolve,
future exports will have a better chance of success. Failing these exports

> early will prevent future spans from being dropped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to allocate enough memory resources on your system to accommodate the
increase in queue size. Changes in the export configuration might result in the 
instrumentation dropping whole export batches that take too long.
```

While helpful, I'd rather eliminate the last bit, as it refers to too many hypotheticals. But happy to reinstate if you deem it important enough!
